---
layout: post
title: HackerRank Week of Code 19 (Part I)
published: true
---

**TODO:**
* check if O(2^N) or \theta(2^N)

This is the first of a series of posts I plan to write about one of the first programming contests I have competed in, HackerRank's [Week of Code 19](XXX). The set of problems was quite interesting and they were released one at a time every day throughout the week of XX, in increasing order of difficulty.

I will skip the first problem, because it's a warmup kind of question. The second problem is called "Two Robots" and goes like this: 

> You have a warehouse with $$M$$ containers filled with an infinite number of candies. The containers are arranged in a single row, equally spaced to be $$1$$ meter apart. You also have $$2$$ robots that can pick up $$1$$ piece of candy and transport it between any two containers.  
The robots take instructions in the form of queries consisting of two integers, $$M_a$$ and $$M_b$$, respectively. To execute a query, a robot travels to container $$M_a$$, picks up $$1$$ candy, transports it to container $$M_b$$, and then stops at $$M_b$$ until it receives another query.  
Calculate the minimum total distance the robots must travel to execute $$N$$ queries in order.

(For details on the problem size and input/output samples, check the original [problem formulation](XXX).)

## Solution
The trivial $$O(2^N)$$ solution would be to enumerate every possible assignment of queries to robots and then simulate their execution by the order given in the input (which is the required one).