---
layout: post
title: HackerRank Week of Code 19 (Part II)
published: true
url_competition: https://www.hackerrank.com/contests/w19/challenges
url_challenge: https://www.hackerrank.com/contests/w19/challenges/scalar-products
---

Problem **Scalar Products** from HackerRank's [Week of Code 19]({{ page.url_competition }}) was quite an interesting one to solve. Despite being labelled "Difficult", there were more accepted answers than in the previous problem [Two Robots](https://www.hackerrank.com/contests/w19/challenges/two-robots), which was supposedly easier to solve.

<!--more-->

## Problem description

Integer sequence $a$ having length $2n+2$ is defined as follows:

* $a_0 = 0$
* $a_1 = C$
* $a_{i+2} = (a_{i+1} + a_i) % M$, where $0 \le i \lt 2n $

Write a function generator, $gen$, to generate the remaining values for $a_2$ through $a_{2n+1}$. The values returned by $gen$ describe two-dimensional vector $v_1 \dots v_n$, where each sequential pair of values describes the respective $x$ and $y$ coordinates for some some vector $v$ in the form $x_1,y_1,x_2,y_2, \dots, x_n,y_n$. In other words, $v_1=(a_2,a_2),v_2=(a_4,a_5), \dots ,v_n=(a_{2n},a_{2n+1})$.

Let $S$ be the set of scalar products of $v_i$ and $v_j$ for each $1 \le i,j \le n$, where $i \neq j$. Determine the number of different [residues](http://mathworld.wolfram.com/Residue.html) (modulus $M$) in $S$ and print the resulting value modulo $M$.

### Constraints

* $1 \le C \le 10^9$
* $1 \le M \le 10^9$
* $1 \le n \le 3 \times 10^5$

<div class="message">
  For more details and input/output samples, check the original <a href="https://www.hackerrank.com/contests/w19/challenges/scalar-products">problem description</a>.
</div>

## Solution
First, let's think of a naive solution to this problem. We have $n$ vectors and we know how to compute scalar products for every pair of vectors. So, we need only to add the results residues to a set (to avoid repeated elements) and output the size of the set modulo $M$. Problem? Kind of, the number of vectors might be as big as $n=3 \times 10^5$, which makes a quadratic solution inefficient.

We know that the number of vector pairs is at least $\Omega(n^2)$. So, how in the universe could we get a solution faster than a quadratic one? We somehow need to take advantage of the structure of the sequence $a$.

**Hint:** Fibonacci sequence

<div class="message">
To avoid spoils and let you think on the problem without accidentally looking through the solution, you need to press the button below to reveal it.
</div>
<button class="toggle-solution show" href="#">Show solution</button>
<button class="toggle-solution hide" href="#">Hide</button>

{% solution %}

It's easy to see how the sequence $a$ is an extension of the Fibonacci sequence $F_i=F_{i-1}+F_{i-2}$ (with $F_0=0$ and $F_1=1$):

$$
a_i = \begin{cases}
CF_i          & \text{, if } i \le 1 \\
CF_i \,\%\, M & \text{, otherwise}
\end{cases}
$$

This is because,
$$
\begin{array}{llll}
a_0 &= 0 & & = CF_0 \\
a_1 &= C & & = CF_1 \\
a_2 &= (a_0+a_1)\,\%\,M &=(CF_0+C_1)\,\%\,M &= CF_2 \,\%\,M \\
\vdots &&& \\
a_{2n+2} &= & \dots &= C(F_{2n+1}) \,\%\,M
\end{array}
$$

So, we figured out something about the problem, but how can we make use of that? In this case, trying a few examples with pen and paper helps to see the pattern. Let's write down the Fibonacci sequence:

$$
(0 \; 1) \; (1 \; 2) \; (3 \; 5) \; (8 \; 13) \; (21 \; 34) \; (55 \; 89) \dots
$$

The parentheses group the sequence elements into the $2$-dimensional vectors that we'll need. If we take the scalar product of vectors $(1,2)$ and $(3,5)$ we get $13$, which happens to be part of the sequence! We can repeat this process with other vectors to realize that the result of scalar products is given by a deterministic position in the sequence, which can be computed according to the positions of the vectors we are multiplying. More specifically,

$$
\begin{equation}
\label{rec}
v_i \cdot v_j = F_{2(i+j)+1}
\end{equation}
$$

Clearly, we can extend the formula to compute elements of $a$ by making the necessary adjustments. Hence, the solution to the problem is given by the number of distinct elements in the sequence

$$(a_k)_{k=k_{min}}^{k_{max}},$$

where

$$
\begin{array}{rll}
 k_{min} &= 2(1+2)+1     &=7 \\
 \text{and $\quad$} k_{max} &= 2((n-1)+n)+1 &=4n-2
\end{array}
$$

### Proof sketch of \eqref{rec}

Since all $v_k$ are themselves defined by Fibonacci sequence elements, we want to compute the following expression recursively:

$$
\begin{align}
   & F_{\alpha}F_{\beta} + F_{\alpha+1}F_{\beta+1}=     \\
 = \; & F_{\alpha}F_{\beta} + (F_{\alpha}+F_{\alpha-1})F_{\beta+1} \\
 = \; & F_{\alpha}F_{\beta} + F_{\alpha}F_{\beta+1} + F_{\alpha-1}F_{\beta-1} \\
 = \; & F_{\alpha-1}F_{\beta+1} + F_{\alpha}F_{\beta+2}
\end{align}
$$

We ended up with a similar expression, but somehow easier one: we moved the terms indexed by $\alpha$ one position to the left in the sequence and, similarly, moved the $\beta$ indexed terms one position to the right, at no cost. 

Now, we can take advantage of the base cases of $F$ to simplify the expression. We can repeat the above process until $\alpha=F_0=0$ and when that happens, we have:

$$
\begin{align}
      & F_0F_{\beta+\alpha} + F_1F_{\beta+\alpha+1}  \\
 = \; & F_{\beta+\alpha+1}  \\
 = \; & \dots \\
 = \; & F_{\alpha}F_{\beta} + F_{\alpha+1}F_{\beta+1} \\
 = \; & v_{\alpha/2} \cdot v_{\beta/2}
\end{align}
$$

$$\tag*{$\blacksquare$}$$


### Code

The input format is explained [here]({{ url_challenge }}).
{% highlight python %}
#!/usr/bin/env python3

def solve(C, M, n):
    residues = set()

    fib = [0, C % M] + [0] * (2*n + 2*(n-1))
    for i in range(2, len(fib)):
        fib[i] = (fib[i-2] + fib[i-1]) % M

    residues = set()
    for i in range(3, 2*n):
        residues.add( (fib[2*i+1] * C) % M )
    return len(residues) % M

if __name__ == '__main__':
    C, M, n = map(int, input().split())
    print(solve(C, M, n))
{% endhighlight %}


{% endsolution %}
